a lot of people exercise because they
believe it will help them to lose fat
one of the biggest debates on the planet
what advice have you got for me so this
is not a well-known fact but Daniel
liberman he studies and teaches how
humans are supposed to live author and
professor at Harvard University exercise
disease sleep nutrition he has the
answers on all of those things that most
of us care about we evolve to be very
Physically Active working in the fields
hunting Gathering but now we live in a
world where only 50% of Americans ever
exercise and the rest of the world is
headed our way cancers depression
anxiety can attribute that to less
physical activity in fact women who get
150 minutes of physical activity a week
have a 30 to 50% lower breast cancer
risks and it's crazy right problem is
that we spend 3% of our medical Budget
on prevention and yet 75% of the time
the disease is a preventable disease
it's a completely backward stupid system
when you started writing this book about
exercise was there any instant changes
that you implemented into your own life
strength training the more I study the
importance of doing weights especially
as you age the more I start kicking
myself for being lazy about that when
people retire they become less active
they tend to lose muscle and then that
starts off a vicious cycle so would you
say we shouldn't retire it's a very
modern Western concept and yes we do pay
a price for it so how does one go from
having a negative opinion towards
exercise to becoming an exerciser as an
evolutionary biologist there are
multiple ways of doing that so Daniel
what are some of the biggest myths
within exercise gosh there are so many
one of the most common of course is
Daniel Lieberman he's been to every
corner of the world visiting native
tribes to understand how humans are
supposed to live and now he has the
answers on all of those things that most
of us care about on sleep nutrition
exercise disease you know on disease he
says that 74% of them can be prevented
and he knows how to prevent them aging
running are we born to run he tells me
the story of a CEO that forces his
employees to exercise excise and the
impact that that's had on that company
and he talks about how as humans we've
evolved to either use it or lose it so
maybe maybe retirement is a really bad
idea for many of us one of the most
thought-provoking pivotal conversations
I've had on this show you're really
going to take a lot from this one and I
suspect after listening you'll probably
start running too for exercise or from
some of the decisions you've spent your
life
[Music]
making Daniel your work is so so
incredibly impressive reaches such an
incredible depth Charters new territory
and it's
been an
unbelievable clearly very passion driven
career you had so my first question for
you is why are you doing
this um it's a good question um I um you
know I started off being obsessed by
human evolution I ever since I was a kid
I was really interested in human
evolution and I spent much of my early
career working on skulls and heads and
why they are the way they are and then I
kind of got involved in public health
and issues of health and disease kind of
through the back door I sort of slowly
shifted my research trajectory toward
studying the evolution of running and
then the evolution of physical activity
and its relationship to health and
disease and and I've become part of a
movement that's often known as
evolutionary medicine which is how to
apply evolutionary theory and data to
issues of health and disease
evolutionary medicine I've never heard
that term before but I love
it where has your work on evolutionary
medicine let's call it where has that
taken you where where has it taken you
to learn to research to study you know
so much of what we think about in terms
of health and disease comes from a tiny
fragment of the world's population
almost entirely like 90% of all the
medical information comes from people
from the United States Canada Europe and
Australia so in order to to study how
bodies really work and how our bodies
evolv to be you have to leave uh places
like Boston where I live and go to
places like Africa or Mexico or wherever
to look at at at other populations and
look at how those populations are
transitioning to to Lifestyles like mine
and so uh we've been working in Kenya um
for the last 15 years or so um I've
traveled some other parts of the world
as well India you know to kind of
collect some data but uh but mostly in
mostly in Africa after doing all of this
work and after taking in all of this
information how has it shifted your
perspective on running exercise more
broadly what have there been any sort of
significant cognitive perception changes
you
know yeah um I actually had a I mean
doesn't happen very often but I had kind
of an epiphany moment um when I was
working in Mexico we were collecting
data on the Taro very also famous for
their longdistance running and uh there
was this elderly guy he's about 70
something years old and he's famous for
his distance running and I was asking
him how he trained and I had asked this
question of a whole bunch of other
people and the translator I was working
with was always struggling to ask that
question because it turns out there's no
word for training in in that language
the concept of training doesn't exist so
so so she was trying to explain to this
guy what my question was um I could even
without a translator I could figure out
just from his tone of voice he was like
why would anybody run if you didn't have
to
and I suddenly realized yeah of course
exercise is a very weird thing right
well if you're if you're a farmer and
you're working super hard every day in
the fields without machines and whatever
or if you're a hunter gather and you're
walking you know you know 5 to 10 miles
a day and digging and throwing you know
doing all kinds of hard work and you're
barely getting enough enough food why on
Earth would you go for a needless five
mile run in the morning I it's crazy
right the most viewed videos of yours
and the most viewed moments in those
videos
address one question do you you have any
idea what it might be no actually the
biggest myths in exercise right I think
you actually pointed out one there with
the um Insight you got in Mexico the way
we exercise going to gyms practicing is
then natural or human but evidently
it's it's a consequence of the privilege
of our lives and the Comfort we have of
not having to seek out our dinner every
day what are some of the other biggest U
myths with within exercise that um
you've come across in writing this book
gosh there are so many I had to actually
limit limit it to 10 so I think um if
you want to understand physical activity
and exercise you also have to understand
inactivity and I think one of the
biggest myths out there is that you need
eight hours of sleep at night um and
that sitting is than new smoking you
know that that basically and I if if you
think about those two different myths U
why is it that we're constantly told to
sleep more and to sit less actually it's
seems a little contradictory to me right
and it turns out that um um that let's
take sitting first so um you know there
are all these uh you know the slogans
like sitting as then you're smoking and
it's really bad for you and you know
every time you sit in your chair you
lose two hours of your life and whatever
uh turns out that um all animals sit
right my dog sits um cows sit chickens
sit every animal sits and hunter
gatherers also sit in fact if you some
of my students actually put sensors on
Hunter gathers and when we're doing some
research in Farmers as well well but
they sit just as much as westerners um
uh so sitting is there's nothing special
about being uh about today's life it's
sitting that it's that we sit all day
long and don't do anything when we're
not sitting right so if you and
furthermore the the big distance
difference is not so much how much we
sit but how how we sit so turns out that
people who um if you get up every once
in a while right interrupted sitting is
actually much more healthy than
non-interrupted sitting for the same
amount of time so in other words two
people might in in the west people sit
for an average about 40 minutes at a at
about whereas hunter gatherers for
example or farmers in Africa where we
work get up every about 10 15 minutes
and when you do that you actually it's
like turning on the engine of your car
you don't drive it around the block
you're you're your your um your turning
on all kinds of cellular mechanisms you
lower blood sugar levels you all kinds
of genes get activated and it turns out
that that is by far the most important
um uh way to way to sit so just get up
every once in a while just pee
frequently make a cup of tea you know
pet your dog whatever thinking when I'm
on planes and I've got a long flight I
just I always sit in the aisle right so
I can get up a lot
always and um what about sleep then so
sleep is another interesting one so this
idea that you know um that you need
eight hours of sleep has been around for
a long time it's been around basically
since the Industrial Revolution um but
um if you actually so so colleagues in
my field so in evolutionary medicine
have put sensors on people who don't
have have all the things that we're told
have destroyed sleep so think about it
we're told that TV and lights and and uh
you know our phones and all these things
are are preventing us from sleeping you
know Edison destroyed sleep right uh so
so when you put sensors on people who
don't have any electricity and they
don't have TVs and they don't have
phones and they don't have have any of
these gadgetry right electric they it
turns out they sleep like six to seven
hours a night um and um they they don't
nap um so this idea that natural human
being sleep 8 hours a night is Just is
just nonsense it's just not true and
furthermore when you start looking at
the data 7 hours if you actually look at
if you graph sort of how many hours a
night you sleep on the x-axis and sort
of uh you know some outcome like
cardiovascular disease or just How
likely you are to die it's kind of a
U-shaped curve so people don't get much
sleep are are in trouble um but the
bottom of that curve is pretty much
always about seven hours so people
actually do better they sleep seven
hours rather than eight hours and yet
we're told that if you don't sleep eight
hours there's something wrong right oh
so you can
oversleep well yeah I mean there's also
some complexity to this too because of
course people who are ill might be
sleeping more and so there's some
there's some biases that creep into the
how you analyze the data but but
basically it turns out that seven is for
most people optimal but there's a lot of
variation right every you know teenagers
sleep more older people sleep less it's
complicated one of the things popular in
culture as well is this idea of doing
10,000 steps a day yeah now that's fun
you know that started because of a
Japanese pomet podometer um so right
before the the Olympics were in Tokyo in
the in the 60s uh they had invented the
pedometer and they were in sitting in a
boardroom and they were discussing what
to call the pedometer and they picked
out of just out of the blue they picked
10,000 steps because that's apparently
an auspicious number and it sounded
about right there was no science behind
it interestingly it turns out it's
pretty good um if you act if you look at
at step per day and health
outcomes um your average Hunter gather
um walks between 10 to 18,000 steps
depends on male female
Etc and and if you look at steps per day
and and outcomes um
um about around seven to 8,000 steps the
curve kind of bottoms out right there's
doesn't seem to be a huge advantage to
taking more than that per day in terms
of you know large epidemiological
studies so it turns out to be not that
bad a goal but it's not a there's no
it's not a perfect number like a lot of
things right it's just a kind of a it's
a reasonable it's a reasonable goal to
shoot
for when you um when you started writing
this this book about exercise and
running and all these subject matters
was there any instant changes or any
real lasting changes that you
implemented into your own life from
everything You' learned I I think about
that all the time with this podcast I'll
have a guest on I'll have these mini
Eureka moments and then something will
stick so I'm I'm wondering having
studied all all of these people all
around the world and looked at their
bodies and exercise and physical
exertion what have you taken into your
own life that has
stuck I would say that I've become more
serious about doing some strength
training you know i' I've always loved
walking and running and you know
endurance kinds of activities and I've
always sort of hated doing weights you
know I just don't like it and I'm I'm
I'm a wimp you know I'm not a very well
I'm I'm not a very strong person and you
know people tend to do what they like
right you get reinforcement from it and
the more I study the importance of
resistance training and the more I study
the importance of doing weights
especially as you age um The more I've
uh the more I started kicking myself for
for being uh being lazy about that so
now I try to do good two strength
workouts out of every week at least and
uh and take it more seriously because
especially as you age loss of muscle
mass can be really debilitating there's
a um the technical term for that is
sarcopenia Saro is is the Greek word for
muscle
and pinea is loss so muscle loss so as
people get older they tend to lose
muscle and when you do that you become
frail and you lose functional capacity
and then that starts off a vicious cycle
right once that happens then you're be
less likely to be physically active and
then of course when you're less
Physically Active your muscles begin to
waste away more and uh it's very
debilitating so I think as we get older
and I'm getting older it's more and more
important you know to to kind of
incorporate that so I think that's the
one thing that I've I've taken to Heart
yeah from what you said there it sounds
like not doing resistance training not
doing not lifting weights as you age
almost accelerates Aging in any sort of
superficial sense but also in a
physiological sense you're you're
increasing the speed of Aging yeah I'm
not sure if I'd think about it that way
but it I think I i' kind of reverse it
slightly which is
that you know aging is just the clock
ticking on right there's nothing we can
do about age but syence is the way the
way bodies degrade as we get older and
what physical activity does actually
maybe the most important thing about
physical activity is that it slows
inessence especially for certain organs
and systems and there are different
kinds of physical activities so there's
endurance physical activities you know
like running walking Etc swimming and
then strength or resistance physical
activities and they have different kinds
of ways in which they slow various
properties of sence which we you know
colloquially call aging and all of them
are important and I think one of the
things that's really interesting about
humans in fact I think it maybe the most
important thing about this book and you
asked about myths earlier the most
important myth I think by far is this
idea that as you get older it's normal
to be less active and that is just not
true um we evolved to be grandparents we
evolve to live one of the things that's
most interesting about humans maybe is
that we evolve to live about 20 years or
so after we stop reproducing no other
animal does that except ex said orcas
maybe killer whales but with the
exception of killer whales humans have
this really weird life history we look
we we we evolved to be grandparents but
grandparents in the old days weren't you
know retiring to Florida or I don't know
where they but they do in England or
whatever go to mayorca or whatever and
you know kick up their heels and play
golf or whatever with carts grandparents
in the in the olden days right or in
many cultures still today are working
right they're working in the fields
they're hunting they're Gathering
they're getting food for their children
and their grandchildren they're helping
with child care and that physical
activity is you know that's what their
job is to be physically active but but
in turn that physical activity turns on
an amazing Suite of of of physiological
processes that counter aging turns on
repair and maintenance processes that
not only keep our muscles strong but
also keep our DNA from uring mutations
keep our mitochondria numbers High keep
um keep our the cells in our brain from
accumulating Gunk uh so that prevents
Alzheimer's and other forms of dementia
I mean for for every system of the body
physical activity has has benefits that
slow the aging process and so when you
stop doing it you acceler and that's the
way in which you it P you perceive it as
accelerating aging but really it's the
absence of physical activity which lets
aging run a muck in your first book in
2013 the story of the human body in
chapter 12 you said um use this phrase
use it or lose it basically we we
evolved to use or lose our bodies and I
was sat with um someone recently and I
was trying to figure out why it appears
that when people retire or the other
instance I've seen is when their their
elderly partner passes away it appears
as if they don't live much longer yeah
it's kind of like kind of folklore or
something that once you
retire your days are kind of numbered
yeah yeah and I was trying to figure out
the evolutionary reason for that but it
sounds like it's kind of what you've
explained there well I mean I think part
of that is um is is depression right um
uh when you lose a partner I mean grief
and depression your cortisol levels go
up your immune system goes down I mean
you know it's it's it's really tough on
your body I mean psychosocial stress
plays a serious physiological toll but
but also as you just pointed out when
people retire they become less active
and that that loss of activity has
enormous effects on every aspect of our
our of our of our body I mean the and
our on our minds I mean physical
activity is important not just for
physical health but also vital for
mental health and um I think a lot of
the problems that U lot mental health
issues we have today depression anxiety
uh some of them you to some extent uh we
can attribute that to loss to less
physical activity and as people age
becoming less Physically Active again
makes them much more vulnerable to wide
sued of
diseases so would you say we shouldn't
retire well or if you do retire I mean
retiring is again another modern weird
thing right nobody retired in the past I
mean if you're a farmer it's like a
subsistence farmer and name it any place
right it's not like something you hit 65
and all of a sudden you no longer have
to work in the fields you work in the
fields until you're you know until
you're dead right and hunter gatherers
don't retire they they continue to be
physically active until until they die
right or until they get too sick so it's
a very modern Western concept um and um
and yes we do pay a price for it but you
of course can
replace you know work that you do with
with with challenging rewarding fun
things to do the important thing is just
not to not to stop being Physically
Active one of my favorite studies ever
published without a doubt um is is a is
a study done by a guy named Ralph
paffenbarger he realized that uh places
like Harvard are fantastic for studying
aging because um Harvard like other
private universities never lets go of
their alumni so until the day you die
they're asking you for money on a
regular basis and and so they're um um
and so he he got the Alumni Association
the Harvard development office to let
him follow series of Harvard alumni from
several years and can keep asking them
in questions about their physical
activity levels and also their diet and
whether they smoked and stuff like that
and then you track them for 25 30 years
and what he found was that the alumni
after you corrected for every Factor you
could think of that as you as the alumni
got older the effect of physical
activity on their health outcomes was
bigger and bigger so alumni who were in
their 20s 30s and 40s for example who
were were exercising here four or five
times a week they had about 20% % lower
death rates by the time that they got to
their 60s and 70s the alumni who were
exercising more had 50% lower death
rates so as you get older so what and
this has been replicated again many
times but what he showed was that as you
get older exercise becomes more not less
important for maintaining your health
been thinking a lot about this because I
was I was saying to Jack my dad is
60-ish but he's very very out of shape
very very out of shape and I was in um I
was in Indonesia and I was with my
girlfriend and we went and we were going
white water water rafting so we had to
go down this really big H Hill with all
these stairs it was like 300 Meers of
stairs and I remember just thinking my
my dad wouldn't be able to do this at
his age at 60 and I want to be able to
go down those stairs when I'm his age
because at the bottom of there was a fun
activity with someone I loved and to
think that I'll get to a point in my
life
where not so far away in the grand
scheme of things um where I won't be
able to go up or down some stairs
because I'm 60
um because of my sort of genetic
predisposition as I saw it was quite was
quite sad but having heard you say that
it's really feels much more like a
choice than it is genetics yeah look we
have this expression in my field which
is that genes load the gun and
environment pulls the trigger right some
of us have genetic predispositions
towards being you know more likely to
get diabetes or heart disease or this or
that or the other but our great great
great grandparents in different
environments weren't getting these
diseases or they were get getting them
at much much much lower frequencies it's
not because they were dying earlier it's
because these diseases were more less
common so I think we too often blame our
genes for many of these these these
diseases um or many of these health
problems um and it's I'm not in any way
denying the role of genetics is but that
environment is way more important and we
have control over our environment to
some extent and so if you want to reduce
your risk of cardiovascular disease
reduce your risk of diabetes reduce your
risk of Alzheimer's dementia you
exercise isn't a Magic Bullet it's not
going to prevent you from getting those
diseases completely but it lowers your
risk quite quite quite substantially and
we know why too I mean we have an
immense amount of data on why that's the
case um for every single one of these
diseases we understand the mechanisms by
which physical activity has uh you know
important mechanistic effects on on
these diseases so it's there's
epidemiological data there's mechanistic
data there's personal data the problem
is that it's hard to do right it's it
takes willpower to um overcome the the
the the inertia of of of of doing what's
completely normal which is wanting to
take it easy right I was I was just you
know I just flew yesterday from Denver
to Boston and in the in the in the in
the airport you know there are these
escalators right next to the stairway
right and and and and um the escalator
and the stair it wasn't a huge stairway
everybody's lining up to take the
escalator and like the stairs are
totally free so I being me I of course I
can't I'm not allowed to take the
escalator unless you know I have to
right so I run up the stairs but you
know it's but those people taking the
escalator there's nothing wrong with
them there they're not lazy it's just an
instinct right it's an instinct to take
to take it easy when you can right
because and we now live in a world where
everybody can do that right because we
have escalators and and lifts and cars
and shopping carts and all these
wonderful devices to make our lives
easier and now you have to overcome this
fundamental Basic Instinct to take it
easy in order to be physically active
and that's basically what exercise is
and so and and furthermore if you're out
of if you're unfit and you're not really
you know exercising isn't any fun right
it's it's it's it's unpleasant you you
know you sweat you get hot and you're
get cranky and you know um and and it's
not that rewarding uh until you get fit
and so uh people hate it right um and U
and then we blame them for being lazy
but they're actually just being they're
just being normal I think we need to
have more compassion towards towards
people who struggle to exercise quick
one before we get back to this episode
just give me 30 seconds of your time two
things I wanted to say the first thing
is a huge thank you for listening and
tuning into the show week after week
means the well to all of us and this
really is a dream that we absolutely
never had and couldn't have imagined
getting to this place but secondly it's
a dream where we feel like we're only
just getting started and if you enjoy
what we do here please join the 24% of
people who watch this channel regularly
and have hit the Subscribe button means
more than I can say and if you hit that
subscribe button here's a promise I'm
going to make to you I'm going to do
everything in my power to make this show
as good as I can now and into the future
we're going to deliver the guest that
you want me to speak to and we're going
to continue to keep doing all of the
things you love about the show thank you
thank you so much back to the episode
this Basic Instinct to take it easy are
we evolved to be lazy take escalator
Riders well I wouldn't use the word lazy
but we are evolved to take it easy to to
rest whenever possible right so we've
now got ourselves into a bit of a
comfort crisis here because everything
has in our lives is optimizing us for
convenience and ease right right and
well it's also it's it sells right I
mean Comfort I mean I mean who prefers
to sit in economy as opposed to business
class right nobody right Comfort is nice
right who prefers shoes that are
uncomfortable right we we we you know
comfort's comfort's you know we love
Comfort right but since when is Comfort
necessarily better for you right I mean
are comfortable shoes actually better
for you than going Barefoot are the
comfortable chairs better for you than
or taking the the lift better for you
than taking the stairs it in the short
term or at least it appears to be today
right yes because we often value the
short-term benefit over the long-term
cost right um that's hyperbolic
discounting is the technical term for
that but but um so we you know we live
in a world where where we we we you know
we pay extra for for Comfort or and
we'll we'll prefer it but um but now we
also live in a world where we have to
now go out of our way to be physically
active because it's no longer necessary
and so again I go back to my original
statement which is that people evolved
to be physically active for two reasons
and two reasons only but it's necessary
rewarding when we don't make it
necessary we need to figure out ways to
make it rewarding and and that's hard
it's very hard making it rewarding so
one way that you might make something
rewarding is by looking at the stick and
then the other side is maybe the carrot
but just looking at the stick then you
were going through a series of diseases
a second ago Alzheimer's um high blood
pressure all of these kinds of things
cardiovascular diseases I almost think
we've come to assume that these are
inevitabilities of Life yeah we'll get
cancer one of us will get someone in
here is going to get Alzheimer's and
that's the way we live so we we're
preparing to medicate when that day
comes that I get God forbid diagnosed
with something that's absolutely right
in fact that's what medical students
today are taught right if you go to
medical school today you are taught that
as people get older their blood pressure
goes up I can tell you that's just not
true it's in the western world where
people are physically inactive and need
crap diets that their blood pressure
tends to go up but there are plenty of
people I'm actually one of them right
who don't have high blood pressure as
they age and guess what's the best way
to prevent getting high blood pressure
as you age it's um you know it's not
like a broken record but we have this
idea that as you get older yes you're G
to you're and we're lucky right you know
because we don't die from small poox
when we're 30 we're lucky to get cancer
when we're 60 right what we've done is
we've confused diseases that are more
common with aging with age being a cause
of those diseases in the first place and
they're not inevitable inevitable
diseases um and many of them are
preventable and and the problem is that
in our society we we don't value
prevention very much we we may talk
about it but we don't really put our
money where our mouth is right in the US
which is arguably one of the worst
Health Care Systems is the worst Health
Care System among the industrialized
Western World we spend approximately 3%
of our budget our IAL Budget on
prevention And yet when people walk into
a doctor's office 75% of the time the
disease is according to the Center for
Disease Control a preventable disease so
we espcially spend nothing to prevent
diseases that overwhelm our system and
cause enormous amounts of misery it's a
completely backward stupid system and so
and and the good news is it's not that
hard to prevent a lot of these things um
um it takes willpower and um takes
education and it takes access to to good
quality food and what whatever um but um
so in the one hand it's very depressing
on the other hand The Optimist in me
says you know we really can do something
and people even if without even if
they're not wealthy or whatever I mean
there are simple things that everybody
can do to improve their health outcomes
these diseases we we encounter today as
we age and just generally in our society
when you look at hunter gatherer hunter
gatherer communities or you look at
certain tribes around the world maybe in
Africa do you see the same
um the same types of diseases in the
same um occurrence level of occurrence
or is there some diseases which just
don't like I'm wondering if like if
because you know cancer seems to be so
popular for ex as as disease and
Alzheimer's and these kinds of things so
I Wonder has that always been the case
throughout human history and is that the
case in other parts of the world that is
such a good question so first of all
some of these some of these diseases are
really hard to to measure in non-western
populations because we don't have the
diagnostic tools so nobody really knows
how common cancer is in in in a lot of
parts of the world right there's just
the data don't exist that said when you
make estimates and you do look at the
studies that are out there and even if
you look in in in historical records in
in places like Europe where people have
been keeping track of this there is no
question that cancer rates have been
rising and that cancer rates are much
much more common in the western world
there's a strong association between
Cancer and wealth and that's because
cancer is basically a disease of energy
right when your cells because cancer is
basically natural selection gone arai in
the body it's when cells start competing
with each other u in ways that that
cause basically and start you know going
you know multiplying and dividing out of
control right it's a kind of natural
selection and what is it that those
cells are doing they're competing for
energy and when you have more energy
like when you're eating more and being
less Physically Active you can you
basically feed those cells so um so can
a high levels of insulin insulin is
highly uh related to to cancer High
insulin levels are are carcinogenic um
high levels of of body of of energy you
cause women for example to increase the
the amount of estrogen and progesterone
that they produce men produce more
testosterone these are and these are
these are hormones that um of course are
for good for reproduction but they're
but again we EV we evolve to be to have
as many babies as possible Right but
that doesn't mean that translates into
Health right so more estrogen more
progesterone increases risks of say
breast cancer or testosterone increases
the risk of prostate cancer so if you
look at most diseases right people are
more physically active they have lower
levels of estrogen progesterone
testosterone they have lower levels of
insulin they have lower levels of blood
sugar all of these depressed cancer
rates and on average people who are
Physically Active have much lower rates
of almost every single kind of cancer
that you can think of women who walk 150
you know get 150 minutes of physical
activity a week have on average
about 30 to 50% lower lifetime breast
cancer risks than people who are
sedentary and yet for some reason this
is not a wellknown fact um and we we
have we have epidemiological data we
have mechanistic data we understand how
and why it works and yet and yet how
often do you hear about cancer
prevention we talk about treating cancer
which is all important if I get cancer I
would like it treated too thank you very
much but why don't we spend more energy
and activity and and and have more
education about how to prevent cancers
in the first
place physical act I've mean I've never
heard that before so that's that's
really helped me um to add more value to
exercise in my mind you're talking there
about insulin levels and how that has
there's a link between your insulin
levels and your chances of getting
cancer
sugar glucose
inflammation
bad yeah I mean I mean look if you want
to if you want take like the three
things you should you know if you really
care about your health don't smoke right
that's kind of obvious I think everybody
knows that get some exercise I don't
think you need me to tell you that right
and and cut down on sugar on foods that
are high in sugar and low in fiber right
that you know what we call high glycemic
foods those are the foods that elevate
your your your your blood glucose levels
your your insulin levels shoot up and
Insulin insulin the basic function of
insulin is is it's what we call an an
anabolic hormone it's its job is to is
to store energy glucose glucose but also
fat okay all right okay so in insul what
insulin does is to get energy into cells
so it's like a taxi it's like an Uber
it's like a taxi yeah well I mean it
it's not a TA it's like a it's telling
other cells to do that so insulin for
example binds to other cells that are
the actual taxis so it's like it's like
calling the Uber I would say maybe right
um and um and insulin is is you know
it's the fund so when you when you eat
food insulin levels go up because its
job is to store that energy and when you
exercise insulin levels go down because
because you want to then reuse that
energy right so so uh so when cells get
more energy they're more prone to going
out of control basically and and and and
inflammation is caused by basically by
getting you store so much fat in your
cells that those fat cells start to
swell and when those start to swell like
anything right they start to rupture
they get damaged and that damage
attracts the immune system and the
immune system gets turned on and that
causes inflammation so so too much osity
too much fat you know over swollen fat
cells is the is a primary cause of
systemic inflammation and inflammation
is like the slow burn in our bodies that
causes widespread damage to pretty much
everything you can think of and it turns
out that so the two ways to deal with
inflammation are one to prevent it right
so don't eat foods that are
pro-inflammatory
like anything with a lot of sugar
basically right that I mean that you
know the sugar is highly
inflammatory um or trans fats are highly
inflammatory but also turns out many
people don't know this but you also want
to turn down your immune system right
you want to turn the dial down and I
don't know just give you one guess what
it is that does that exercise exercise
and the and and and the way it does that
is that when you when you're physically
active you're using your muscle cells it
turns that muscles are also an endocrine
organ your muscles are producing a
molecule called interlukin 6 il6 that in
low levels is pro-inflammatory but at
high levels it's actually
anti-inflammatory it turns down
inflammation and your muscles because a
third of your body there's muscle right
when you go for a run or or swim or bike
ride or whatever you're producing a ton
of this stuff and it turns down levels
of inflammation so people are Physically
Active even if they're overweight are
actually controlling and regulating
their inflammation and we never evolved
to regulate inflammation because in this
way because we never evolved to be
physically inactive until recently
nobody was physically inactive until
they unless they were dying right so so
we never evolved an alternative
mechanism to regulate inflammation other
than physical activity and we didn't
live in a world with this much sugar we
never lived in a I mean it's astonishing
you you pay more money for Foods today
that have less sugar added right I mean
that's just ridiculous right cuz it's so
cheap and sugar is you know we lost
everybody loves sugar I mean I've um
I've gone hunting with um Hunter gathers
you know you know H gathers and um and I
can tell you that they're honey addicts
right I mean I've gone out with these
guys and they go from you know if they
if they fail on their hunt like by 10 or
11 if you haven't killed an animal you
know that's it for the day right and
then it come it turns from being a
Hunting Expedition to a honey collecting
Expedition and they'll go from hive to
Hive to Hive get smoked burn out the
bees and just Gorge themselves on more
honey than I could possibly imagine to
eat except these are a lean Physically
Active Hunter gathers and they they
handle it just fine um but it's you know
it's the it's the Paleolithic equivalent
of you know eating Mars Bars all day
long but they've been out doing physical
activity for how long that yeah I mean
the average day is about 15 kilometers
of of walking with some running yeah so
so so they're you know they can they can
they can cope with it how many hours is
that oh that's two to three hours
probably okay so from that I have gared
that I need to do 15 kilometers a day
for two or three hours every day well
remember it's not a prescription right
so that's a kind of like the Paleo
fantasy sort of naturalistic fantasy
that if you live like a hunter gather
somehow your your your world will be
perfect right that's basically what the
paleo diet is sort of all about right
and that's not true either yes you need
to be physically active but it turns out
that certain amount
you know if you're any any physical
activity is better than none right and
if you look at the kind of any curve of
any output any health health health
health outcome like how many years you
live or whether you're likely to get
cancer or heart disease or whatever you
know any little physical activity your
curve starts to fall quickly right your
your likelihood of cardiovascular
disease starts just you know a few
minutes a day of exercise has big
benefits but eventually that curve
flattens out right and it flattens out
well before the hunter gatherer level so
you don't need to be a hun gatherer in
terms of physical activity to get the
benefits this is a I've asked a few
people this question I don't think
everyone's anyone's really answered it
um but I suspect you might be able to if
if you were responsible for redesigning
the nature of our modern world to make
it more matched and less mismatched what
are some of the first things you would
do to help Society benefit in terms of
our happiness and our
health I I think about this all the time
because we we don't seem to be turning
around we seem to be hurtling in a
direction kind of unconsciously towards
artificial intelligence and moving less
and being more s sedentary and taking
pills more to fix everything lonelier
than ever before and I how you know if
we were to redesign it blank canvas
piece of
paper that's a tough question because
um we've essentially given ourselves
what we want
right um I can go into a supermarket and
I mean I can do something that's
unimaginable until recently I can have I
I can have basically anything I I can
eat better than the king of France you
know a few Generations ago I can I I can
I me here like in New York there's like
every Cuisine possibly available to me I
I don't ever have to climb the stairs I
can take elevators I mean we've we've
we've we've made our world so convenient
and comfortable um and yet there are
consequences to the many of the things
that we crave and want
so in an Ideal World you don't want to
you don't want to REM I mean you have to
you have to honor and respect people's
um um desires right I'm not a I don't
believe in in in preventing people from
taking the elevator right or or forcing
them to you know eat eat whole grain
bread as opposed to white bread right
but if you banned white bread and you
banned elevators other than for those
people that need it for accessibility
reasons Etc they would do better over
the long term they' be healthier and
happier they would right so the it's
really a balancing act between between
um um respecting people's Liberties and
choices and educating them and helping
them so in my world I would I would do
more to nudge people right um I would
instead of banning sugar I would tax it
more um instead of
um uh
pushing uh all kinds of foods on people
I would push I mean why don't we why
don't we advertise healthy foods the way
we advertise unhealthy Foods right I
mean when's the last time you saw an ad
for just how amazingly healthy asparagus
was right but that doesn't get the part
of my
brain going does it no it doesn't but um
but we could do more to to nudge and
encourage and help people right you
don't have to like ban sugar and cookies
right the way some people but but but
simply promote um and help people help
themselves right most people want to eat
healthier food most people want to
exercise um but they live in a world
where it's hard to do it and they live
in a world where um there are very few
incentives I would make it such that
healthy food would be as as inexpensive
as as unhealthy food and make sure that
that people had incentives and and make
it also fun to be physically active like
for example um every I mean who doesn't
like to dance right every culture in the
world has dancing right dancing is a
form of of of physical activity it's
social it's fun it's engaging why don't
we have uh why doesn't every every town
in America sponsor dancing right um you
know it would probably do an enormous
amount for people's physical health and
their mental health I mean we could do
that I mean that's just one example
right so I would I would um I would I
would and and why is it that in medical
schools doctors don't learn about they
don't they don't study nutrition and
they don't don't study exercise and they
don't learn um because that's because in
our medical system is designed to treat
people after they get sick rather than
prevent people from getting sick so so
we need to you know reverse how we fund
health care right and so schools of
Public Health are these kind of little
marginalized places where you know where
where great ideas go to die right and
and medical schools where all the money
is right and doctors aren't taught to to
deal to to to I mean there are entire
fields of medicine that don't have the
word preventive associated with them I
mean you ever heard of preventive
Orthodontics or preventive you know
Optometry or prevent you know preventive
Orthopedics I mean it just doesn't exist
right so we we could do a lot more um
and and have enormous benefits chapter
11 of this book you talk about someone
who has taken their own approach to
getting people moving and exercising um
in their own business the Bjorn Borg
company I love that bjor Borg company
can you tell me about that that company
yeah so I was um so I was I was curious
about this idea of how to get how to
help people be more physically active
right and again you know my my
fundamental hypothesis is that we evoled
to be physically active either when it's
necessary or rewarding and so I was
curious if there was any any companies
in the world that have made physical
activity necessary in other words what
if we forc people to be physically
active and I found one so far I think
there's only one company in the world
that I know of maybe there's some others
but this is the only one I've ever found
so far and it's the bjorg sports company
in Sweden where the CEO of the company
is this crazy sort of exercise addict
and he um he requires every member of
the company to to exercise they have
sports hour every Friday at 11 o'clock
so I actually um when I when I was
searching around and I was thinking you
know right working on the book I
actually you I got I found an article
about them and I you know I clicked on
the on the company website and you know
how most companies have a little contact
us M so I I clicked on the contact us
and I wrote a little note saying you
know dear Borg company I'm a I'm a
researcher an evolutionary biologist I'm
interested in exercise and I'm and I'm
fascinated by how your company um
requires people to exercise could I
learn more and the next morning there
was a an email from the CEO of the
company saying why don't you come and
visit us so so I hopped on a plane few a
few months later went to Sweden and they
they let me he was so nice you just let
me just go anywhere in the company and I
I went to sports hour and I I talked to
to employees throughout the company and
it was fascinating I mean um a lot of
the employees of the company um first of
all a bunch of people apparently left
the company when he took over a CEO and
required this but it doesn't matter who
you are you could be working in the mail
room you could be the CEO you could be a
visiting board member whoever you are if
you're there on Friday you have to go
exercise with them and they have this
pretty serious kind of exercise thing
and apparently some people quit um but
but um but but prettyy much everybody
else said you know it's actually a
pretty damn good thing do you agree with
that approach well yes and no um every
University in the world used to require
and every school right supposedly
requires exercise right I'm sure you had
physical ex you know physical some kind
of phed required in your
school those standards are slipping
around the world and more and more kids
are doing less and less in school uh
universities were are no exception it
used to be that all universi ities
required some degree of physical
education mine was no exception in fact
Harvard was a leader in that back in the
you know hund and something years
ago and over the since basically the
1970s that's basically disappeared
although most students if you ask them
they think yeah that's actually a pretty
good idea so I don't know maybe we can
bring back exercise as a and and the
thing is that if you get used to it
right when you're young you're more
likely to do it when you're older right
because you set those are the that's the
age in which your habits become become
well your habits become your habits
right and so there's a certain age where
where if you can keep keep you know get
that making it make it a habit you're
probably more likely to continue doing
it for the rest of your life we kind of
see it as overreach don't we I was
thinking about if I was to announce one
of my companies that everyone is now
required to exercise it would seem like
like tremendous overreach if I announce
that everyone is required to read a
certain book they' do it and it' be fine
and it might be seen as a positive thing
right it might be a representation of
our values that we are Learners and
we're innovators and we keep you know
nourishing our brains but you turned
around to your team and said listen
you're all required to you're all
required to go for a run every day or
something people would it just feels
personal yeah like that's not the
responsibility of an organization to
tell me to go exercise but we have we
have company you know Retreats I mean we
do all kinds of stuff where people are
required to do it so I don't know I
challenge you try it what we do and what
we've always done we even do it with
this team the D team is about 30 people
so we have a fitness channel in the
company um slack channel the
communication channel that we use and in
that channel um and we did this at my
previous company as well where we would
enable and facilitate so we we someone
started a women's football team so we
enabled it and promoted it someone
started a men's football team so we
enabled it and promoted it and this this
also applies to non-physical sort of
exercise related clubs like someone
starts the reason reading club and we
enabled it and promoted it um and we
also paid for it if they need to if they
need new kits for example when the
women's football team needed wanted to
have their own uniforms we paid for it
because we saw a huge value in terms of
Staff retention connection community and
all those things that actually lead up
to staff retention if we could have more
Social Clubs outside of the office you
know if you're thinking about leaving a
job there's a number of things you weigh
up the pay the job whatever but you also
weigh up how the community like the
group of people I love and how much they
bring to my life and I actually think in
the remote Working World um it's
something that CEOs and leaders have
really not paid enough attention to that
if they really want to retain their team
members they should have them together
as much as they can even outside of the
office bonding in a world where screens
are on the rise and pubs are on the
decline and social activities and
churches are on the decline there's less
sort of uh institutions that connect us
socially work has a big opportunity to
do to do that so one of my big things
always in my head is like how can I get
the team members of my companies to hang
out more and and a multiplier to that is
how can I get them to hang out more and
move their bodies more because then
they'll feel better right well well
think about it it's play right play yeah
exactly and I mean and play is what is
another thing we evolve to do right what
kids play and we're one of the few
species that plays as adults right and
what is play play is a way in which you
you you learn cooperation you you you
you build community um but you also move
your body right in the first chapter of
your book you say that you went to visit
the Native American tribe and I'm going
to try and pronounce this the
taraa Tarahumara and they're famous for
their long running yes what did you
learn about running from them well it's
you know they have been famous for well
over 100 years I mean many uh people
have gone to study the taramara and have
commented on their amazing ability to
run but what I I really learned from
them is that um uh for them physical
activity is spiritual um you know
there's this book Born to Run that uh
that describes their their running and
calls them a hidden tribe of super
superathletes they're not hidden and
they're not super athletes um and um and
the one thing that the book missed was
that the the main impetus for the for
the for the running they do these famous
long-distance races is that it's a form
of prayer um it's really very beautiful
um and um and it's a it's a metaphor for
for life and um and and it's also a an
opportunity to bet and sports and all
that it's all wrapped into one and and
what I've learned was that this actually
used to be almost Universal among Native
American populations right Native
American tribes everybody had
long-distance races and ball games and
and they were all had a spiritual
element it's just that they've they've
retained their traditions because
they're in a very remote part of of
Mexico that's essentially inaccessible
we all used to do this all human used to
do this and in fact if you think if you
look around the world every population
has a tradition of endurance endurance
events some of the subject might you
talk about in your book but also outside
of your book is is how we used to run um
in terms of you know I was at the foot
doctor what's it called I don't know
what they're called orthoped pediatrist
that's what I said
podiatrist what did I say but I went to
the podiatrist the other day because I I
got this what's it called when you're
I'm going to point at it on my foot this
part of my foot here started to get lots
of pain every PL fitis that's it planter
fitis I started to get some planter ftis
so fun and it was just this ongoing pain
and they prescribed me some insoles I
stood on a couple of machines some soft
stuff and they measured my foot and took
this scan of it and said right basically
you're standing wrong um your arch is a
bit too flat take these insoles and wear
them in all of your shoes and I just I
always think in these moments when
someone prescri describes me something
that's not natural I
go why like where did I go wrong and I
think that's the key question where did
I go wrong who lied to me to the point
now that at 30 years old I have these
bloody insoles that have to put in all
my shoes because presumably that's not
natural presumably my my ancestors don't
have Bloody insults
yeah
so planter fasciitis is what I would
call a mismatch disease right a disease
that's more common or more severe
because our bodies are inadequately
adapted to Modern environments and in
your case and as is the case with a lot
of people you have a weak foot so so we
you know you look like you go to the gym
looks like you're a pretty fit person
right I'll make a bet you you strengthen
pretty much every muscle group in your
body except your feet right comment
right well but we don't right one of the
reasons is because we we encase our feet
in stiff sold shoes that are very
comfortable and and the reason the shoes
are comfortable is that you're your foot
muscles have to do less work when you
was using those shoes right we have
shoes that are stiff soles they have
arch supports right and your your foot
has four layers of muscles in them and
those muscles are supporting your arch
and at the bottom of those four layers
of muscles is this layer of connective
tissue the plantar fascia and the
problem with the plantar fascia is that
if it stretches too much it like
anything else right it gets inflamed but
it's got almost no vascularization right
so it it's very hard for it to repair
itself when it gets inflamed to prevent
PL plantor fasciitis the best way to
preventing it is having a strong foot a
strong foot's a healthy foot so the way
to way to treat the disease on the long
term is to strengthen your foot but if
you want to just alleviate the symptoms
that's what your podiatrist did by
giving you an insole right it's
basically preventing your mus your arch
from collapsing as much making it more
comfortable so your your plantar fascia
gets stress less and so it can kind of
um alleviates that that that that that
stretching and hence the pain right so
that's a typical example of what I call
dis Evolution it's what what happens
when you treat the symptoms of a
mismatch disease rather than their
causes or preventing their causes so
podiatrists are a bit like drug pushers
in that sense right because they're
they're essentially putting your foot in
a cast right and then and for the rest
of your life you kind of have to keep
using them unless you strengthen your
feet so I so so there's nothing wrong
with those you know treating the
symptoms I mean pain is no fun so we are
the insoles right kind of you know
alleviate the pain but also work on
strengthening your foot and I think
you'll find that the planter fasciitis
will will disappear and never come back
so the plant of fitis fasciitis um has
now
healed after about a month of wearing
the insole um I no longer have the
insoles um with me here in New York and
I don't have them in any of my shoes
because I've also taken a bit of time
off um running on my feet I was playing
a lot of football so now I'm at a point
point where I can go to the preventable
stage prevent it happening again and you
said to strengthen my foot how does one
strengthen their foot good question so
there are some exercises um they're kind
of foot doming exercises and things like
which there you know I can send you some
links to videos showing you some good
foot strengthening exercises so that's
one way to do it um but the other way is
to wear more minimal shoes um to wear
shoes that aren't stiff sold that don't
have AR arch supports go barefoot a lot
right um and those that will naturally
strengthen the muscles in your foot
because you'll have to use those muscles
so you ever gone for like a long walk or
run on a beach right and afterwards your
your feet are kind of tired M right the
reason your feet are tired is because
you're now working on a compliant
surface right it's not stiff so your
muscles having to work more to stiffen
your foot to push you forward right jack
could you go grab my the black shoe out
of my bag I just want to show him
something so um so wearing shoes that
aren't has stiff sold they don't have
arch supports will slowly strengthen
your feet but and this is a huge butt if
you do too much to fast you will your
planter F will come roaring back and
you'll hate me you'll like you'll never
forgive me because um yeah there's a
Vivo Barefoot um yeah I wear the same
shoes oh you you've got the same shoes
on um great shoes yeah those are
wonderful shoes those are those are the
those are the exactly the kind of shoes
that will help strengthen your feet
these are fairly a new addition in my
life yeah they and they feel really
strange because you can kind of feel the
floor yeah it's exactly what you've
described is yeah but but you you can
transition if you have weak feet which
I'm I'm guessing you do you if you go if
you suddenly that's the only shoe you
wear all the time you'll probably regret
it right so so slowly slowly slowly
increase the percentage of time that
just like anything else if you if you
like suddenly decide to lift you know
huge weights that you can't lift before
you'll hurt yourself right the same
thing is with your feet so so slowly it
does it but you if you do it gradually
and slowly and carefully you can build
up strength in your foot and um and
you'll and you'll be a happier happier
person and this is this goes back to
everything else you've said about how
choosing Comfort choosing to have a nice
supportive shoe has actually just kind
of deferred a problem off into the
future for me it's the same with diet
it's the same with avoiding exercise and
being seditary and and all these other
things where when you choose the easy
Road in the short term which is this
wonderful cushion shoe I've chosen the
muscle hasn't built up in my foot and
I've paid the price correct so I need to
again choose discomfort more in the
short term go up the stairs run Barefoot
to avoid the late the consequences later
down the line yeah I mean I don't think
you have to run Barefoot but um though
it can be fun but um um but yeah I mean
and I can think of plenty of other
examples um we love Comfort but Comfort
is not necessarily good for us when you
um when you look at these tribes are
they do you know who liver King is huge
massive muscles talks about an ancestor
living um what do our hunter gatherer
ancestors look like in terms of that not
like him no okay I mean look think about
it muscle is it's really expensive right
it's actually a super expensive tissue
about a third of our body's muscle and
it's using up about about you know A
fifth or more of the calories that we're
expending right just just sitting there
not even using them right they're
they're very costly tissues right and so
if you have more muscle than you need
you're
basically adding to your your cost of
living right if you if you're a hunter
gather or even a subsistence farmer
living on the margin of food security
having more muscle than you need is
actually deleterious right remember the
only thing that natural selection cares
about is how many offspring you have who
survive and reproduce it doesn't care if
you're strong or healthy or nice or
loved or you know fun or whatever it
only cares about whether you have
grandchildren that's it right that's the
cold calculus of selection my brain is
going if I have big muscles I'll have
more romantic opportunities than I'll
have grandchildren well only up to a
certain point right so if more muscles
if if they attract the opposite sex and
and make them want to reproduce with you
yes that could be a benefit um I'm not
so sure how much women are attracted to
the liver King but um um and that's not
something I even want to know the answer
to but um and certainly shouldn't ask
him but um um um but but there's a
reason we have use it or lose it which
you mentioned earlier right because when
we need when we increase our demand we
increase our capacity right when you go
to the gym and you out right you build
muscle but if you stop using those
muscles you lose it and that's an adapt
right because you don't want to spend
extra energy on muscles you're not using
right so you want enough but not too
much you want to be economical with
muscle mass right um and so our if you
look at the data um from Hunter gathers
and people have done that they've done
grip strength tests Etc and all kinds of
other fun things with like mini Olympics
and we've done this too um people are
reasonably strong but they're not super
strong and they're not they're not buff
and built and bulked and all that sort
of stuff they've got enough muscle to do
what they need to do but no more and the
reason why people find muscle attractive
anyway is because it's a evolutionary
signal isn't it
of uh reproductive value and resources
maybe and your ability to go out and do
you know what I mean why why does why
does a woman for example find a man with
muscles or in good shape attractive in
2023 when we're not hunting for
gazelle well I'm not a I'm not a I'm not
a psychologist or or so I'm not sure if
I I'm qualified to answer that but I
could I could Venture the guess that
obviously if you're trying to if you
know we pair bond as a species and we
have been for for millions of years
probably you want to pair bond with
somebody who's going to because we also
have of cooperation in food sharing
right you want to pair bond with
somebody who's going to be able to you
know bring home the bacon literally and
figuratively right but but bringing on
the bacon does not mean looking like
Arnold schwarzen at least back in the
day Arnold schwarzer back in the day
right being being bringing home the
bacon back in the day meant being a a
persistence Hunter being able to to run
long distances and being moderately
strong so they looked more like a
marathoner or or a football player than
they did a a weightlifter right so it's
conceivable it's conceivable that
someone who is really really big is
actually um less attractive because they
wouldn't have been able to hunt and run
and Hunt as well as someone who is a
little bit Yeah you also have you have
to feed more you have to feed them more
too yeah and that's a you know those are
precious calories so I'm going to guess
that uh look if you look in in in
non-western populations uh you don't see
physiques like that this is a this is a
privilege of people who are able to go
to gyms and um and you know e you know
you know whey powder shakes and all that
kind of stuff to kind of build their
crazy muscle mass but it's not something
that our ancestors were able to do on a
regular basis that's for sure a quick
word on hu as you know they're resp
sponsor of this podcast and I'm an
investor in the company one of the
things I've never really explained is
how I came to have a relationship with
Hu one day in the office many years ago
a guy walked past called Michael and he
was wearing a hued t-shirt and I was
really compelled by the logo I just
thought from a design aesthetic point of
view it was really interesting and I
asked him what that word meant and why
he was wearing that T-shirt and he said
it's this brand called hu and they make
food that is nutritionally complete and
very very convenient and has the planet
in mind and he the next day dropped off
a little bottle of hu on my desk and
from that day onwards I completely got
it because I'm someone that cares
tremendously about having a
nutritionally complete diet but
sometimes because of the way my life is
that falls by the wayside so if there
was a really convenient reliable
trustworthy way for me to be
nutritionally complete in an affordable
way I was all ears especially if it's a
way that is conscious of the planet give
it a chance give it a shot let me know
what you think there's another myth that
you bust which I thought was really
interesting because I think I know a lot
of people that have used this as a as a
reason not to run they say it's really
bad for your knees oh man that gets me
so mad right I mean I hear this from
doctors all the time right oh yeah
running is bad for your knees now it is
true that knee injuries are the most
common running injuries um um but
arthritis which is really what they're
usually talking about um it's absolutely
definitively not true that running
increases rates of knee uh cartilage
damage and arthritis so arthritis is
caused by cartilage wearing away in a
joint right and it's it's a it's a myth
that that running actually increases
cartilage damage if you have arthritis
running is excruciating and problematic
but if you don't have it running
actually uh if anything may be slightly
preventive um because cartilage joints
like everything else benefits from being
used right and so physical activity
actually helps promote strong and
healthy joints we used to think that it
just cause them to wear away but
actually you know like cars you know
wearing away their tires but now we know
that actually physical activity promotes
um repair mechanisms in cartilage just
as it does in other tissues in the body
and um um and of course the other thing
about running is that I think a lot of
people run incorrectly today so uh so
that's why we started studying barefoot
running millons you know a long a few a
bunch of few decades ago is because if
humans have been running for millions of
years most of that time we were running
Barefoot so kind of curious how did
people run before shoes and what we
learned was that today shoes have these
cushioned
heels that enable you to essentially run
the way you walk right you land on your
heel and everybody who's Barefoot
sometimes lands on their heel but people
who are Barefoot often more often then
not land on the ball of their foot and
then then let their heel down it's
called A four-foot strike or a mid-foot
strike and when you do that we worked
out the bi mechanics of that and
published a paper on the cover of nature
showing that when you do that you
actually prevent your foot from crashing
into the ground causing what's called an
impact Peak a collisional force you run
lightly and gently so if you were to
take your shoes off and run up Lexington
Avenue here I guarantee you you would
not be landing on your heels within a
few steps you'd start landing on the
ball of your foot because it hurts less
and so that's how we evolve to run we
evolve to run in a cushion in a in a way
that that doesn't involve you know
slamming into the ground with every step
and the and that that causes less Force
around your knee um the tradeoff though
because nothing comes for free
everything has trade-offs is that it's
harder on your your ankles your calf
muscles and your kiles have to do now a
lot more work to let your heel down and
so people who switch from heel striking
to four-foot striking often have
Achilles tendon problems they get calf
muscle problems if they don't do it
properly they'll get if their foot
muscles aren't strong enough they'll get
all kinds of foot problems right so you
can't just suddenly become a Barefoot
Runner and start four-foot striking if
you're going to switch you have to
switch gradually and slowly and build up
strength and learn to do it properly
another thing people do is they tend to
run like a ballerina high up on their
toes that's really hard on your ankles
and your calves so you got to do it
properly but if you but it can have
enormous benefits and so and we know
again if you run that way there put puts
much less force on your knees and again
knees are where people get injured the
most so I think a lot of knee injuries
come from um um from the way in which we
run so would you recommend if you can to
run
more Barefoot especially if you have
those kind of shoes we just discussed
well I think what matters is how you run
not what's on your feet right so I would
say a Barefoot style how do I learn to
run in a new way though well I mean
there's some tricks so one of them is um
first of all I don't know how you run so
so so maybe maybe you already run just
fine um but um a Barefoot style tends to
be um a high stride rate or high stride
frequency so um 90 strides per minute or
180 steps per minute
roughly you know um 170 to 180 steps per
minute is about right um relatively
short strides so you're not throwing
your leg out and to me the most
important thing is not what we call over
striding if you ask any coach on the
planet they'll say over striding is bad
over striding is when you throw your leg
out way in front of you and you land and
that leg is a stiff leg so that a stiff
leg means more Force right um and a and
um um and it's harder on your knees um
and so if and so a good runner lands uh
with their with their shank with their
tibia vertical so their ankle is below
their knee when you do
that pretty much everything will work
out properly right um it'll mean that
you won't land hard on your heel it'll
mean that your your leg will be acting
like an excellent spring you willon
produce a lot of breaking force um it's
a it's a it's I to me I think the most
important skill in running is not to
overstride um and um so I actually tell
instead so don't worry about how you're
going to hit the ground just worry about
your overstride if you solve your over
DED you're more likely to run well what
do you think's um what's the best kind
of sort of cardiovascular exercise for
the promotion of good health because
I've been doing some CrossFit stuff I've
been doing some hit workouts um I've
been trying not to run because I've had
a few injuries and trying not to run as
much because it seems to be a little bit
more impact than if I'm bullshitting
myself there but um so I've been doing
some like hit workouts every for 30
minutes a day when I leave here well you
do hit you hit hit hit works every
single day pretty much every day at the
moment we track it with a group of
friends we have there's 10 of us in a
WhatsApp group whoever's L whoever does
the least workouts every month is
evicted and there's a raffle so there's
a raffle yesterday on the first was it
the first yesterday yeah for a new
member and we do that every month and
we've done it for three and a half years
that's great I've been in there I was
the first ever member so I've been in
there for three and a half
years well I think you know I mean the
most the best exercise the one you like
doing is there one that's like better
you know like the you know I think you
got to mix it up there is no one perfect
exercise right I mean I think what you
do sounds actually pretty good right you
got a mixture of of of you know low slow
intensity some some high intensity you
want to have some strength training you
want to have some cardio I mean we never
evolve to do one thing and our bodies
are too complex to benefit from just one
thing uh mixing it up is is the obvious
way to go right um I think the Bedrock
for any kind of physical I mean you ask
anybody right cardio is the Bedrock of
of of of of of exercise right it it
promotes the most health benefits right
it's good for your good you know you're
burning energy it's good for your
cardiovascular system it's good for
controlling inflammation but but but
there are different kinds of cardio in
high intensity versus low intensity and
there's also strength training right uh
which is also you know important so you
know there's no look we've tried to
medicalize exercise right it's like a
like there's a proper dose right you
know take this pill this many mill migs
this many times per week right exercise
it doesn't work that way there is no
there is no optimal dose everybody's
different depends on are you more
worried about heart disease or
Alzheimer's or diabetes or depression or
you know are you previously injured are
you fit are you unfit there it's
impossible to prescribe exercise in this
kind of medicalized way it doesn't work
a lot of people exercise because they
believe it will help them to lose fat ah
one of the biggest debates on the planet
it has been a huge debate even on this
podcast I've had multiple people come
and say a whole range of things about
weight loss and cardio and I'm kind of I
don't know what to believe
anymore well anybody who wasn't confused
doesn't understand what's going on right
you know it's
um it's sad that there such a debate um
but um but that's how science works
right so um as you know I wrote about
that in this book
um part of the explanation for the
debate is that again what dose are you
analyzing in what population in what
kind of context right so the pretty much
every major Health Organization in the
world recommends that you get 150
minutes per week of fysical activity
that's kind of like The Benchmark that's
what the you know the wh who the World
Health Organization considers the the
division between being sedentary versus
active
so and and a lot of people are unfit and
overweight and struggling to be
physically active have struggled to get
150 minutes a week right so a lot of
studies prescribe 150 minutes a week of
exercise walking for example a moderate
intensity ex physical activity and then
look at effects on weight loss and guess
what when you when you walk 150 minutes
a week which is what 20 minutes a day of
walking which is about a mile a mile a
day you're not going to lose much weight
you're basically burning about 50 50
calories a day doing that right that's a
ping amount of calories compared to
drinking a glass of orange juice right
so so surprise surprise those kinds of
studies show that those doses of
physical activity are not very effective
for weight loss however plenty of
rigorous controlled studies that look at
higher doses of physical activity 300
minutes a week or more find that they
are effective losing for helping people
lose weight but not fast and not large
quantities so you're never going to lose
a lot of weight really fast by
exercising it's just not going to happen
because you know a cheeseburger has what
you know 800 900 calories you have to
run you know 15 kilometers to lose that
to to burn the same number of calories
you're going to be hungry afterwards too
so you're going to make some of that
back you have
compensation so so physical activity is
a is actually there's just no way around
it you have to be a flat earther not to
argue this way but there you know there
physical activity can help you lose
weight but it's not going to can help
you lose a lot of weight fast and not at
the low doses that often are prescribed
but the one thing that we do agree on
and I think this would not be
controversial is that physical activity
is really important for helping people
prevent themselves from gaining weight
or after a diet from regaining weight
and there are many many studies which
show this one of my favorite was a study
that was done in in Boston on policemen
you know policemen are kind of have a
reputation for you know having too many
donuts and being overweight right and
Boston is no exception so they did this
great study at at at Boston University
right across the across the river where
they got a bunch of policemen on a
diet really severe diet the policemen
all lost weight but some of the
policemen were were had to diet and
exercise some just dieted alone and as
you might imagine the ones who dieted
plus exercise lost a little bit more
weight not a lot just a little but and
then they tracked them for months
afterwards because most people after a
diet the weight comes just crashing back
right the policeman who's kept
exercising even after the diet was over
and they went back to eating whatever
the hell they wanted donuts whatever
they're the ones who kept the weight off
but the ones who didn't
exercise the weight came crushing back
another good example would be the have
you ever seen the TV show The Biggest
Loser uh yes where they people go on and
lose weight yeah so that so there's
crazy show right these people you know
this is like totally unhealthy they were
confined to a Ranch in Malibu and these
guy these people lost ridiculous amounts
of weight guy named um Kevin Hall at the
National Institute of Health studied
them for for for years afterwards and
looked at and most of them regained a
lot of the weight that they lost and
there was one person on the show who did
not and that was the person who kept
exercising right and that's you know
just yet more when said one data point
but there's lots and lots of evidence to
show that physical activity what it's
other important benefit when it comes to
weight is is preventing weight gain or
weight regain when we talk about dieting
we talk about exercise or Diet exercise
or Diet like why is it an or I mean why
isn't it exercise and diet diet is of
course the Bedrock for weight loss but
exercise also plays an important role
and should be part of the mix on the um
police example and The Biggest Loser
example I can relate in the sense that
when I
exercise when I go through the the
moments of my life where I'm most
committed to exercise I'm also most
committed to my diet yeah because I if I
go to the gym I will not then leave the
gym and have a donut or a pizza
absolutely not it seems like wasting the
effort so if you look at the sort of
correlation between the moments in my
life where I eat healthiest they're also
the moments in my life where I'm most
most focused on the gym and I noticed
there was a couple of months ago had a
bit of a motivation slump managed to
stay in our little WhatsApp group but
coasted down the bottom of the
leaderboard for for a couple of months
on and just like surviving every month
by one um and through those moments my
motivation in the gym had gone down and
my diet had gone down the minute I
managed to get in the gym into a big
workout the same day my diet came back
yeah of course right and they coary
right and and that's one of the reasons
why when people do big studies of of you
know what you know you can look at what
what what people die of right what's on
the death certificate you know cancer
heart disease whatever heart attack um
and then you look at what caused the
cancer what caused the heart dis when
people try to do that it's almost
impossible to separate diet and exercise
because people who tend to eat better
also tend to exercise more they're both
in our modern upside down chopsy Turvy
world they're both markers of privilege
people have money to go to the gym also
have money to buy healthy foods and um
um and people who care about their
physical activity also tend to care
about their diet so so at that level
they're very hard to separate however if
you're studying a particular component
of a system in a randomized controls
trial in a lab you can separate them out
and so we know that have independent and
also interactive effects what is the um
the most important thing we haven't
talked about Daniel I think the most
important thing is that we need to be
compassionate towards each other I mean
there's so much shaming and blaming and
prescriptions and you know um um you
know the reason I entitled the book
exercised is that people we make people
feel exercised about exercise we make
them
feel uncomfortable and un confident and
shamed and and you know here you and I
are having this conversation but I can
tell that you you take you know you're
you're I mean I know I've listened to
enough of your podcast you care about
your your health and you care about diet
you care about exercise and people may
look at you and think gosh I wish I was
like him but it's just not me you know I
can't I'm not I'm not there right and
they may feel put off by our
conversation and I think that so often
these discussions make people feel feel
bad about about what they're doing and I
and I and I and I and I think that what
we need to emphasize is that if you put
a you know if you put a chocolate cake
and an apple in front of me here I would
want to eat the chocolate cake and it
would I might eat the apple only because
you're there but if you weren't there I
would eat the chocolate cake right and
and and when I'm in the in the in my
building at at Harvard my office is on
the fifth floor of this old Victorian
building every single day I want to take
the elevator and the only reason I take
the stairs is that if anybody catches me
in the elevator I'll be a hypocrite
it's not that I don't want to take the
elevator I do want to take the elevator
right I guess you guys say Lift right um
and and and we make people feel bad for
taking the elevator right um they
shouldn't feel bad it's an instinct and
so I think we have to figure out ways to
help people without shaming them and
without blaming them and without
bragging and whatever make you know you
know talking about you know the marathon
they ran or this that or the other make
them feel um less uncomfortable about
the topic and realize that you don't
have to swim the English Channel or run
a marathon or you know join your
WhatsApp group and do crazy hit workouts
every day by the way you don't need to
do hit workouts every day to get the
benefit um um instead just you know
taking the stairs in your building every
day you know anything is better than
nothing and and you'll get benefits from
that and I hope that that's the message
that needs to get out right anything is
better than nothing and if you can get
started on that on that on that pathway
then it'll it'll eventually become
self-rewarding and and that and that
leads me to the other topic that we
didn't talk about which is that the
reward system of physical activity you
know you and I if we go like I'm I'm
really looking forward to my run
tomorrow morning in the park I love
running Central Park it's one of the
best places in the world to run right a
fantastic view from the top and it's
just gorgeous right um but when I run
Central Park tomorrow I'm G to get a big
dopamine hit I'm gonna my body is going
to produce all this dopamine which is
the molecule that says do that again
right it's a reward gamblers get
dopamine hits right um people eat
chocolate cake get a dopamine hit hit
right but if I were unfit and overweight
I wouldn't get that dopamine hit and so
when people start exercising they don't
get the reward that people who are fit
and accustomed to doing it get and then
they're made to feel bad like you didn't
enjoy your run around Central Park well
it takes months if not years before you
actually get that reward really yeah
because because uh just like being
overweight um causes you to become
insensitive to insulin you become incens
insensitive to all kinds of other
hormones and neurotransmitters and
dopamine is one of them so so it it's
not an instant like benefit right it's
hard and so we need to be compassionate
again towards people who are struggling
to become fit and struggling to get the
reward and also if you're overweight and
you run around Central Park it's like
like if I were carrying weights in
running around Central Park it'd be much
harder right it's you know it's it's
challenging and so we once you get you
know into that state it's hard to get
back to the state of activity and so we
we need as a as a society to to to help
those folks rather than judge them those
folks that are struggling and I was one
of those folks that were struggling for
many many years I would say to myself
every year um pretty much all of my
adult life that this was going to be the
year that I'd get fit I'd try all of
these various different you know fad
exercise things buy all this stuff I
announced in 2017 that I was going to
work out every single day and that
lasted for six months and then I yo-yoed
back out of that it never stuck with me
until
2020 and that's I've been exercising six
days a week since 20 2020 82% of days
and um I reflect and try and diagnose
how I went from someone who what was it
that changed and if I can figure out
what it was that changed at the most
fundamental level in my mindset or my
attitude or my life or whatever it was
then I can help other people figure out
that too or at least give them more
sound advice or at least be more
empathetic whatever is required
to help them you know and I have a
platform here where I speak about
exercise a lot and these things so
what's your suspicion what's your
suspicion on what it is that makes
people go from being you know maybe
having a um a negative opinion towards
exercise or their ability to be
disciplined with it
to becoming an
exerciser do you know I have this is a
question that obsesses me in fact we
have a big project right now a big Grant
to actually study this really right now
um because I the more I study it the
more I think it's
social the more I think that um um again
I think people are Physically Active I.E
in our modern world
exercise for two reasons when it's
necessary or rewarding and what makes it
rewarding for most people is the social
aspect and that social aspect can take
many dimensions it can be running with a
group of friends and you know you might
want to go
only a mile but your friends convinc you
to run another Mile right and you end up
running two miles right or you're
feeling bad and crappy and your you know
your friends help you do it or I a
running buddy right and I often you know
meet meet friends for early morning runs
and I can tell you that the evening
before it seems like a great idea to
meet Aaron at 6 am on the corner of mass
Aven lenan the next morning at 6 am. I
want to stay in bread with my wife you
know I don't want I don't want to meet
this nasty smelly guy you know at 6:00
a.m. in the cold and dark but I I agreed
to meet him and out I go right and I'm
usually glad I did it afterwards or um
you know we can go on there other social
ways in which which is but or dancing
right I mean nobody thinks of dancing as
exercise but it's exercise right so
that's one important social Dimension
and the other one though is
accountability um I describe in the book
I'm there's a there's a a friend of mine
in San Francisco who was struggling to
to to exercise so she signed up for a a
a program it says company called
stick.com I don't know if you've run
across it where it's a commitment
contract where you send like $1,000 doar
to them and they keep it in a bank
account they probably invest it and make
a lot of money on it too of course but
you set up a referee and and you agree
that I'm G to not smoke or this or that
or the other or in this case exercise
and if you don't do it and your referee
is you know what you know keeping track
of what you do um you get to choose
something negative so in her case her
husband is her referee and she doesn't
walk can't remember what but every day
she has to walk a certain number of
miles her husband will will tell her and
and or tell the website and it'll send
$50 to the NRA that week oh my God and
she hates the NRA with a burning passion
what is the NRA n the National Rifle
Association they're the they're the
people who are trying to prevent gun
control legislation in the United States
and they have effectively prevented gun
control legislation United States which
is now kills more children than cars in
the United States so if she doesn't
exercise she sorry she doesn't do it
then then then money goes to this
organization that she hates so this a
this is a stick if there ever was one as
opposed to a carrot and I don't think
she's every time I see her ask her you
know you have you kept up the walk she
says oh no yeah hasn't gotten a penny
right so for her it's been very
effective so it's she's made a
commitment contract that that stings
right that really hurts now I I think
that might be a little on the extreme
side and I wouldn't necess recommend
that to everybody but but she's
accountable right she's made herself
accountable in some ways and I think um
people can find ways to make themselves
accountable to a friend a loved one a
parent you know priest who knows what
right um You Might um or or hire a
trainer that's mean that's kind of what
a trainer does makes you accountable
right I think so so those are again
social ways to help people be more
physically active so I think there are
multiple ways of doing that and I
suspect that is going to be the most
effective sort of set of tools that will
help people one thing I actually do is
the on the screen saver of my phone it
has something that really inspires me so
I see every day and it's that reminder
for me which reinforces my my why across
my life it's actually my my home screen
on my iPhone is actually a bit of a mood
board for me we have a closing tradition
on this podcast where the last guest
leaves a question for the next guest not
knowing who they're going to leave it
for and I don't get to see it until I
open the book um the question is what is
one aspect or feature of your life that
causes you the most
friction SL discomfort and how can you
change or fix
it I would I would say
um it's my tendency to compare myself to
others
um uh I you know you know life is short
life is precious we're all experiments
of one and uh when I think about when I
when I when I engage in that oh so and
so has such and such um that's um that's
a really bad habit that's a really bad
trait and it never leads anywhere good
it only leads towards either either I
think about how I have more of something
than somebody else that leads to um uh I
think uh
unhealthy um feelings of Pride or
feelings of jealousy um you know so and
so has this award or such and such and
and uh that's um that's kind of pricious
so I think that's a a bad habit that I
uh I work hard to to
overcome because it changes your
expectations of yourself and that change
takes steals happiness it steals
happiness
yeah it steals happiness thank you for
the work you do Daniel very important
very very important and increasingly
important I think um when we look at the
the health outcomes especially here in
the United States of people I mean you
actually share a number of them in the
book which I didn't didn't we didn't
really go into but they're just
horrifying yeah um that's scary out
there especially as it Rel relates to
exercise um there was one in particular
that I wrote down because it horrified
me I can't it was just all the stats
around the current Healthcare only 50%
of Americans ever exercise ever really
ever
ever and only 20% meet those very
minimal World Health Organization
standards where I we're a we're we're a
nation of couch potatoes and the rest of
the world is headed our
way but not if they get this
book because it I think it is a real
perspective changer and it's a real eyea
and it's a necessary one so thank you so
much for w it you're fantastic at what
you do and um I'm I'm now a huge fan of
your work after delving in deeper and
deeper and deeper um so I can't wait to
see what you do next well thank you and
I recommend everyone to go get this book
exercised because um yeah I thought I
knew a lot about exercise but uh but
from reading that and having that window
into Hunter gather ancestors and tribes
and other cultures it really that whole
idea of a mismatch life how mismatched
my life is in so many fundamental ways
from diet to exercise to socializing um
and these kind of books help to realign
well thank you although it seems that
you're doing a pretty good job I'm
trying you know I think we're so far
from being human though that there's
still a long way to go for all of us so
thank you
Daniel quick one as you know Airbnb are
a sponsor of this podcast and I was
actually in an Airbnb last weekend when
me and my friends had a reunion in New
York and it's from staying in airbnbs
over the years that led me to start
hosting my own place I know friends of
mine who actually Airbnb their own place
in order to pay for the Airbnb they use
when they're away on holiday which is
pretty smart and maybe you stayed in an
Airbnb before and thought this is
actually pretty doable maybe my place
could be an Airbnb it could be as simple
as starting with a spare room or your
entire place you could be sitting on an
Airbnb and not even know it whether you
could use some extra money to cover your
bills or something a little bit more fun
your home might be worth more than you
think and you can find out how much it's
worth at airbnb.co
slash host check it out find out how
much your home is worth and let me know
what you think
[Music]